---
layout: post
title:  "What we learned at IDS 2016 - Part 2"
date:   2016-03-28 08:00
categories: jekyll
permalink: /archivers/ids-2016-p2
author: "Noah John"
---

The [2016 Innovative Dealer Summit][ids] (IDS) took place in Denver in March this year. The event attracted a lot of awesome, progressive minds from the automotive industry.  My goal is to share the main takeaways from the two-day event. [Be sure to check out part one of my takeaways]({% post_url 2016-03-22-ids-2016-p1 %}), where I discuss the online nature of car buying, the new generation of car buyers, and the fear of complacency.

## Social media marketing

Part of the changing marketing strategy of auto dealers involves social media. In part one of this series, I stated that dealers are adjusting to the new shopping habits of buyers (especially millennials). A majority of car shopping happens online and buyers spend more time on the internet than ever. In addition, social media is one of the main destinations on the internet these days, with Facebook being the largest hub. At the end of 2015, [Facebook had 158.4 million users in the U.S. alone][fb-users], with 177.5 million projected by 2020. On top of that, 91% of millennials have Facebook accounts. Since the average U.S. Facebook user [spends at least 40 minutes on the site][fb-time], it's clear that auto dealers need to find effective methods to reach people via social media and specifically Facebook. AutoAlert's marketing guru, [Julian Johnston][julian], highlighted the effectiveness of using employees as your social media advocates. By empowering your employees to be vocal online about their work, companies can reach more people and on a more personal level. Also, auto dealer employees that are happy at work and post about work will draw customers away from possible competitors because car buyers would rather drive more distance in order to deal with an "insider" that's a familiar face. As a result, nearly 75% of sales associates that market using their social media accounts outperform their peers.

## Mobile ready - mobile fast

On the more technical side of things, car dealers are learning that they need to invest into their mobile websites. 50% of website visitors from Denver are using a mobile device to browse. In rural areas, the percentage of mobile users can rise to 70%. Hence, more of the extensive online car buying research will occur on a smaller screen, and likely using a cell phone data plan. This means that dealership websites must look great and be responsive on mobile devices. If not, car buyers will quickly navigate to another website that gives them a better experience. I've followed the evolution and adoption of technology since I was a kid, but even I was surprised by how frequently people use their mobile devices for shopping. Call me old-school, but I've always preferred to sit down at a desk and do my shopping on a "traditional" computer. However, the market research says that I'm becoming a growing minority. Websites need to display and function superbly on mobile devices. If you want an example of a good mobile shopping experience, check out Amazon.com on your phone. I don't use their app because their mobile site works great. Their site is fast and the important actions I want to do are easy to perform.  That's the experience users expect today.

## SEO - the constant struggle with changing grounds

Another technical hurdle facing car dealerships is SEO (Search Engine Optimization). In other words, "how do I show up first in Google?" The answer is not so simple. Car dealers must create websites that are structured well and contain meaningful content in order for Google's ranking algorithm to rank them highly. The fascinated component to this situation is that Google continues to radically change what their ranking criteria is. This is because website creators are constantly searching for ways to exploit Google's ranking algorithm and Google is constantly changing to ensure that never happens. It's a bizarre game of nerdy cat and mouse. What of particular importance to car dealerships is local SEO. Google knows where people are searching from, so Google considers local factors when ranking search results for users. DealerOn's [Greg Gifford][greg] expounded on the need for car dealerships to have someone working full-time on SEO (in-house or from a trusted third-party). SEO requires constant monitoring and a great attention to detail because Google pivots its ranking algorithm regularly. As with the other takeaways I've covered, the message is simple: car buying is happening online and car dealers (as with other businesses) need to embrace technology and the fact that it's becoming a more data-driven world. There always an inertia in adopting new things, but if car dealers can learn to use the available digital tools, they will be able reach more buyers than ever before.

[IDS]: http://www.innovativedealersummit.com
[julian]: https://twitter.com/julianjohnston
[greg]: https://twitter.com/GregGifford
[fb-users]: http://www.statista.com/statistics/408971/number-of-us-facebook-users/
[fb-time]: http://www.businessinsider.com/how-much-time-people-spend-on-facebook-per-day-2015-7



