---
layout: post
title:  "What we learned at IDS 2016 - Part 1"
date:   2016-03-22 08:00
categories: jekyll
permalink: /archivers/ids-2016-p1
author: "Noah John"
---

I just got back from the 2016 [Innovative Dealer Summit (IDS)][IDS] in Denver, Colorado. Hosted by the [Colorado Automobile Dealers Association][CADA] (CADA), the two-day event featured speakers from different areas of the automotive industry. The focus of the conference is to bring together progressive-minded GMs and vendors in order to exchange ideas on the latest trends in the field.  It was my first time attending the event and I was blown away by how forthcoming everyone was with information and insights. If you've never attended before, I encourage you to think about doing so next year. [Tim Jackson][timjackson] and CADA put on solid event. In this post and the next, I will share some of the major topics that came up over my two days at the conference.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/X9bXln15kMM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>
 
## 90% of car shopping happens online

It might seem obvious, but this fact came up repeated during the IDS in many different forms. Industry vets report that 90% of car shopping happens online. Car buyers have a plethora of options for finding the vehicle they like. They can compare prices online and decide what works for them before they even walk in a dealership. Car buyers now visit only 1 or 2 dealers before purchasing, whereas in the past, they used to visit 5 to 7 dealers. When buyers do finally enter a dealership, they are constantly vetting what the salesman is saying via their mobile device. Cell phones have put the internet at car buyers' fingertips, for better or for worse.  Just as doctors have to regularly cope with patients that self-diagnose with WebMD, car dealers must learn to handle the "up-to-speed" car shopper. To further complicate things for a car dealer, roughly 2/3rds of all walk-ins still happen without prior communication of any kind. Meaning, dealers are in the dark about what their possible buyers have been doing during their extensive online research. The shopping process has evolved and dealers need to adjust accordingly. One way to handle this change is turn all this online research into an advantage. Since 90% of car buying research happens online, there are tons of digital breadcrumbs that shoppers are leaving that can be analyzed for predictive insights. If dealers continue to embrace the digital nature of shopping and the information that can be extracted from it, they will be to learn about their customers before they set foot in the dealership.

## It's about the millennials, yo

I'll admit, this caught me off guard. The amount of references to "millennials" during my time at IDS surprised the hell out of me. From keynotes to workshops to conversations, everyone was interested in millennials. The interest is simple, the new generation of car buyers is maturing and car dealers must cater to their needs. The question that looms is: does selling to a millennial differ from selling to a previous generation? I wasn't able to find a clear answer, but some at IDS were saying that as people age, their buying habits tend to align with the habits of the previous generation. However, other claimed that millennials embrace technology more rapidly that previous generations and this means dealers must learn to meet and interact with their millennial clients in the digital world. I've seen emphasis on video content and social media marketing as ways dealers are trying to capture the attention of millennial buyers.

## Fear of complacency

Car dealers have been killing it since the last recession, with 2015 being a record year. In 2015, [17.5 million new vehicles were sold][wsjarticle], up 5.9% from the previous year.  In addition, there were 38 million used vehicles sold, up 5.6% from 2014. While these numbers are fantastic, this record of success is worrying some industry veterans. With car dealers raking in profits, the concern is dealers will become complacent and not continue to innovate. This is especially worrying in the face of the rapidly changing technology world. Dealers must avoid being stagnant, and continue to push innovation and remain on top of the evolving the tech scene. Only time will tell if dealers continue hitting records or stumble due to their complacency.


[IDS]: http://www.innovativedealersummit.com
[CADA]: http://www.coloradodealers.org
[timjackson]: https://twitter.com/TimWJackson
[wsjarticle]: http://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-car-sales-poised-for-their-best-month-ever-1451999939


