---
layout: post
title:  "Big data enters a new industry - the NFL."
date:   2016-04-04 08:00
categories: jekyll
permalink: /archivers/nfl-rfid
author: "Noah John"
---

Change is on the way for a sports juggernaut, the NFL. Even though its profits exceed 1 billion dollars, the NFL is about to embrace big data in a massive way. In doing so, there will be massive repercussions felt for many years to come. So what’s going on? For the past 2 years, the NFL has partnered with [Zebra Technologies][zebratech] to been gather data for a “Next Gen Stats” project. The NFL placed RFID chips in every player’s shoulder pads in order to collect their precise movement data. [In May 2016, the NFL is planning to grant all NFL teams access to this data.][espn] The NFL is about to evolve.

## What are RFID chips?

Radio-frequency identification (RFID) chips are tiny (think grain of rice) devices that track how and where they move. You put one of these chips on something, and the chip tells you where that something is going - in real-time. They are used in a ridiculous number of situations. So much so, that the RFID market was valued at over 10.1 billion dollars in 2015. In the automotive industry, RFID chips are commonly used on car manufacturer assembly lines. They are placed on vehicles in the factory to monitor their movement and progression. Despite their little size, these chips are capable of producing massive amounts of data.

## NFL turns to the WWE(!) for help

To oversee this project, the NFL hired [Perkins Miller][perkins] to be their Chief Digital Officer and Head of Media Operations. Miller has extensive experience in the digital realm and his most recent accomplishment was launching the WWE Network, a subscription-based, video-on-demand service for WWE followers (wrestling fans). Seen at the time as a huge risk, the WWE bet on the fact that traditional television and pay-per-view revenue would continue to drop as their fans, like everyone, were spending more time interacting online and viewing content online, than watching TV. Now the WWE Network has over 1 million subscribers and is positioned to continue to grow. With these 1+ million subscribers, the WWE has a direct, digital connection to its most ardent fans and can collect information on them and better market to them personally. By betting on technology, the WWE is winning and the NFL wants Miller’s tech experience to help them launch their “Next Gen Stats” project.
 
## How will big data change NFL?

For the past two years, the NFL has been meticulously collecting player movement data using RFID chips that are in the players’ shoulder pads. In May 2016, teams will get access to it. What is going happen?

### Scouting and contract negotiations are going to be affected ###

The NFL will become another Moneyball story – teams will leverage analytics to make personal decisions.  Teams will have tangible performance stats when evaluating players. Who cares about a player’s 40-yard dash time when you can look at that same player’s performance on the field during a game. Coaches want to use the RFID chip data to evaluate player match-ups. How often and successfully are wide receivers diverted from their routes by cornerbacks? With RFID chip data, coaches will be able to see concrete numbers. In addition, they can better track the affect of an injury on a player’s athletic performance. The massive amount of player movement behavior is also going to influence contract negotiates.  GMs will not longer tell players they’ve simply “lost a step”.  Instead, they will be able to present a player with an actual report saying he’s lost 5.4% of his speed on the field during the past 12 games. Suddenly, a whole new dimension has been added because all the data being collected. 

### Fantasy football will approach the complexity of astro-physics ###

Not really true, but you get the idea. [Fantasy football is huge – like really, frigging huge.][forbes-fantasy] Daily fantasy companies earned over 2 billion dollars in entry fees in 2015. If that wasn’t crazy enough, growth is projected at 41% (that’s FORTY-ONE percent) per year. Many of the successfully fantasy players use complex statistical modeling to draft the best team each week. If the Next Gen Stats data is made public, you can bet that fantasy players will gobble up this big data and inject into their predictive algorithms – and likely win even more.

### More interactive viewing experiences ###

One of the first things the NFL did with their Next Gen Stats is incorporate it into their official NFL app for Xbox One. NFL viewers can simultaneously track the on-field performance and movement of all players while watching the game live. I’m sure the fantasy football geeks I mentioned above also delight in tracking players on their Xbox One. In addition, my former employer, EA Sports, is seriously considering using the data the NFL has collected on players to improve the realism of their popular Madden franchise.
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3xGOfDwYEwc" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Despite their massive success, the NFL has recognized that big data can only enhance their opportunities.  Therefore, they have seriously invested in collecting data that can be used to improve NFL products, team performance, and viewer engagement. If you’re interested in learning more, I recommend you check out the following articles as a starting point:

* [Forbes: How RFID chips are changing the NFL][forbes-nfl]
* [Wired: All NFL Players Are Getting RFID Chips This Season][wired]
* [Ars Technica: How the NFL—not the NSA—is impacting data gathering well beyond the gridiron][ars]

[espn]: http://espn.go.com/blog/nflnation/post/_/id/200005/nfl-teams-prepping-for-rfid-data-dump
[ars]: http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2015/09/the-nfl-is-reshaping-the-surveillance-society-xbox-one-experience-and-gambling/
[forbes-nfl]: http://www.forbes.com/sites/aarontilley/2016/02/06/how-rfid-chips-are-changing-the-nfl/
[wired]: http://www.wired.com/2015/08/nfl-players-getting-rfid-chips-season/
[perkins]: https://www.linkedin.com/in/perkinsmiller
[zebratech]: https://www.zebra.com/
[forbes-fantasy]: http://www.forbes.com/sites/darrenheitner/2015/09/16/the-hyper-growth-of-daily-fantasy-sports-is-going-to-change-our-culture-and-our-laws/
[nfl-app]: https://youtu.be/3xGOfDwYEwc



